Okay, we're talking to Dr. Owen Gingrich.
It's working and it's fine.
You know, we've talked before, and of course the title of this book is The Great Copernicus Chase, and I'm really fascinated about, and by your fascination, with this one book.
And of course you give me a lot of background in the essay in here, but tell me a little bit, I mean, why is it so important for you to find not only every copy, but to try and determine...
the people who read it through the centuries, actually.
Well, there was a challenge thrown out by Arthur Kessler in his The Sleepwalkers, in which he has entitled a section, The Book Nobody Read, and describes Copernicus's book as the all-time worst seller.
And I started out on the project assuming that was more or less correct, and it turned out, over a period of years,
evidence was piling up that that was a very wrong view of things, and so it wasn't that I set out to prove Arthur Kessler wrong.
It's just how it worked out.
Doing something like that gets a momentum of its own.
I started out by knowing that we were going to celebrate the 500th anniversary of Copernicus in 1973, and he had been
examined for so long, it seemed to me that it was going to be hard for me to add anything new to it.
So, I had this incident in Scotland, or on my way up to Scotland, talking with a colleague who was also on the planning committee for the Copernican celebrations about
Well, maybe there are more people alive today who've read Copernicus's book in these great book programs than in all of the 16th century.
And we thought maybe we could count on the fingers of two hands the people who have read the book intelligently than the very next copy of the book I found, which was in the Crawford collection.
And that's something I thought was very much missing from your book, one of the great
the greatest private library established in the last century was the Lindeciana, and you say practically nothing about it.
We're writing another book so we can redress our earth.
Okay.
Throw it out so that you can do it.
If you want to digress a little bit, tell me a little bit about it and what else.
I'll pick up this other story later then.
Lord Crawford, who is one of the leading earls of
Scotland, started in as building a book collection, and then his son, and I think that's the 26th Earl, became more and more taken up with this, and they established a truly incredible library.
But the 26th Earl was also an amateur astronomer.
And his observatory was better outfitted than most professional observatories could afford to be in those days.
So, he had a wonderful collection of astronomy books, and he was rather dismayed when it was decided not to reappoint an Astronomer Royal of Scotland, in part because the person who had been in
that position so long had been very ingenious, but in the end became more and more interested in pyramidology and a few things like that, and he brought some level of disrepute to the position.
But Lord Crawford decided that he would give all his instruments and his astronomy book collection to Scotland, provided there
Well, he didn't put any provisions in.
He gave the whole thing with just a little note.
The implication was, and he was busy talking this up with the Secretary of State and others, the implication was, you better, you know, make sure that we have a national observatory in Scotland, and here's the nucleus for doing it.
So, these books constitute a fabulous astronomical collection, and
But the rest of their collection, which is in multiple volumes in the Bibliotheca Lindeciana.
And that is where?
It is, well, there are various volumes that commemorate it, but the collection has been broken up.
For example, the Oriental Manuscripts, which was a fabulous collection, have gone to
the Rylands Library and formed the basis for their Oriental collection.
That was part of that original purchase that Mrs. Rylands bought?
That was the Spencer collection.
That was the Spencer.
I understand that, but I thought there were some components given, donated by Lord Crawford.
They had sort of the world's leading collection of Bibles for some time.
But eventually, the collection got dispersed.
So I think they were coal and iron magnates, and when the market sort of collapsed, they sold off some things, including their Gutenberg Bible.
But originally, that was part of the collection.
The present Lloyd Crawford has still got a remarkable collection of Bibles, but it doesn't have some of those high spots anymore.
So, to get back to the train in Edinburgh.
I went up there to, since I was going to Edinburgh, I stopped in at the Royal Observatory to see the Crawford Collection, which at that time was kept in a couple of large safes, sort of three deep in the books.
It was, they were not easy to see, but basically these books had been just on the open shelves
all the way up through World War II.
And then they decided, wait a minute, these books are much too valuable to be out here in the open.
And the incredible thing is, as far as I know, they never lost anything.
That's truly amazing.
But I looked at the Copernicus book, and this first edition was annotated from beginning to end by somebody who clearly knew what he was doing, and it seemed to me completely unlikely that if
So few people had read the book, the very next copy I would see would be so well annotated.
So, I really scratched my head on that one, and then decided that in some incredible way, this was the copy of one of the ten people we had mentioned, and that's how it turned out to be.
It was the copy of Erasmus Reinhold, who was the preeminent
astronomer teacher in the generation following Copernicus.
And so he was working this book through very carefully, and he set into motion a whole tradition of teaching about Copernicus within the Lutheran university system.
Reinhold was at Wittenberg, the central Lutheran place.
I decided at that moment that, aha, here is something I could do
which might cast some further light on Copernicus, which nobody has done.
Namely, look at a number of copies and see what kind of annotations are in to get an idea of how people were looking at the book and how they were studying it in the 16th century.
And of course, this presupposes your own expertise.
This is not something for a layman scholar, a researcher to do.
I mean, you have to bring tremendous baggage to this kind of
You have to appreciate what these annotations are.
You have to be able to.
Well, this was the beginning of a long learning experience, which started right there at the Royal Observatory.
Namely, it had a blind-stamped pigskin binding and no name in the book.
I was really hard put to figure out whose it was.
And then I saw the initials, E-R, stamped in the binding.
And I said, aha, Erasmus Reinhold.
So I grabbed a piece of paper to make a rubbing.
And when I made the rubbing, it came out E-R-S, which at that moment deflated me, because I was so naive, I had no clue that the way people stamp their names in books was not only their name, but where they're from, Erasmus Reinholdus Salveldiensis, his hometown.
So, it was all right for Reinhold, but that was the first thing I learned about
16th century bookbinding.
And then I had eventually to learn about heraldry in order to decipher book plates, and I had to learn about watermarks and about how to distinguish bindings and so on.
It was quite a whole series of
bookish things I had to learn.
So what precisely would you say you learned from these annotations?
In the Reinhold copy, what I discovered was that he was terribly interested in the details of the planetary mechanisms and not at all interested in the cosmology of throwing the earth into motion and fixing the sun in the center, which is what we consider the great breakthrough of Copernicus's work,
And that was of secondary importance to Reinhold, who liked the idea that Copernicus had eliminated one of the Ptolemaic mechanisms that he considered unaesthetic.
So it was a totally different way of looking at it, and it turns out that this is absolutely vital for understanding what was going on in the acceptance of the Copernican theory in the 16th century.
Namely, it wasn't until the very end of the century with Kepler and Galileo that people began to say, hey, guys, this is a real system.
This is how the physical world really is.
This isn't just playing mathematical games.
So in a very real way, this copy of this printed book provided a window for you, didn't it, into the thought and the thinking of that time?
Absolutely.
How often can something like this happen?
The supreme irony is that the first book I saw was the best.
In searching for over 500 more copies, which I've looked at, there isn't another book that matches it in terms of insights and quality.
But that's not to say there weren't lots of other interesting surprises along the way.
Well, I mean, of course, you were spoiled by this first one.
What other things did you think that you might have been able to find, what you're hoping you might find?
Well, at the outset, you would expect at least some people to say, this crazy, mixed-up guy is throwing the whole world out of kilter.
But you don't get comments like that.
The closest you get is a series of comments in the margin that say, here, Copernicus is dreaming, or here he's hallucinating.
And it turns out that these...
have to do with some of his trigonometric proofs, where Copernicus neglects the fact that there's ambiguity in certain trigonometric solutions of triangles.
Let me show you what I mean.
If you have a side and an angle and an opposite side, there's a double solution, you see.
if this is the opposite sign.
So that's picked up from a commentator who says that about Copernicus, and a fair number of people copy that into their books.
But you don't find the criticism with respect to the heliocentric cosmology.
Sort of the
The really interesting thing about the annotations is that major annotations very rarely come singly.
That is to say, a major astronomer putting major annotations in his book is liable to have one or more students who copy those notes into their own books.
So if you find some major annotations, you're likely to find them again in another book.
And then another fascinating set of annotations are the corrections put in as a result of the Inquisition's instructions in 1620.
And because they were very explicit about four places, sorry, a dozen places for censoring the book, if you look at a book, you could immediately say yes or no.
Was this book censored or was it not?
So I now have very good statistics on this, which the Inquisition never knew.
They got something over 60 percent of the books in Italy, and essentially none outside.
This is fascinating, isn't it?
So, really.
You probably saw that.
I think there is the map in this book on the.
That's quite a nice book, by the way.
I just got a dandy review of it.
There's people who are apparently still reviewing it, where somebody said, it's a great book.
You don't have to read it in order.
People have said that about my book, and I take that as a compliment.
You say you've actually sought out and located 500 approximately?
Here's the map you see on page 109, okay.
Where you see the censored copies and the black dots, and there's a more updated version of that map.
It'll be in my
So this is a living book for you.
I mean, this is actually a perfect example of a book that actually resonates truly from the time of its first appearance through the generations, doesn't it?
There's actually a history not only of the text that was written, but each individual copy has been influential.
I mean, is that a fair statement?
Well, that's right.
It's influential in actually looking physically at the book as opposed to seeing
a copy of it and looking at the text.
If these were all like peas in a pond, there's no reason to look at all of these copies.
I mean, it would be, I think, very dull to start looking at copies of Darwin's Origin of Species.
To begin with, it's in a trade binding, so they are all alike unless they've been rebound or something.
And people aren't typically annotators anymore, the way they were
in the 16th and 17th centuries.
So I would not expect, excepting very rarely, to find interesting remarks in the margins.
And with Darwin, you have, you know, a couple thousand.
Well, by the time you go through all the editions, you've got tens of thousands of copies of the book.
So trying to find the ones that are annotated by looking at all of them would be a foolhardy thing.
You mentioned in here that only two or three books have undergone this kind of scrutiny.
The First Folio of Shakespeare, the Lutenberg Bible.
I suppose we could include the base psalm book.
There are only 11 or so of them.
And Copernicus.
The Elephant Folio of John James Audubon is a wonderful book.
Somebody is redoing the Shakespeare folios at the moment.
I've had some correspondence with him.
In terms of technique, I guess?
Yeah, in part, swapping notes on what one can find or expect to find about provenances, for example.
And do you think that there will be annotations in the folios?
No, he's not finding much at all like that.
Do you have an explanation for that?
Well, it's basically not the kind of thing you, it's not a technical work that you would want to write clarifying comments in the margins.
Also, I think the destruction of the Shakespeare folios has been considerably greater.
You estimate that actually half of the Copernicus .
.
It was appreciated as an important book early on.
It's very interesting, something I found rather recently, and it's coming out in, I believe, the next issue of the Harvard Library Bulletin.
It's an issue that you will find interesting, because the editors have asked quite a number of people to write very short essays on Widener Library as I
a seat for detective solutions.
In other words, using the library to solve particular problems.
I'm a member of the Friends, and I think they send that to the library.
They should, yeah.
So, I've mentioned some of this research, and I mentioned finding something like seven or eight major libraries in the 16th century in England.
Out of those, you get something like six copies of Copernicus, which shows that anybody who's building a major library is quite apt to have this book.
The one where it doesn't occur is one that is strictly a legal library, so it wouldn't have been a target book for him.
But otherwise, it seems to be, you know, already by the late
1500s, it's seen as a classic book, and people aren't going to throw it away, because it was an expensive book, and it was sufficiently technical, it doesn't get worn out.
So, tell me, how did you go about locating these books?
Did you take out ads?
Actually, almost so.
I have put little notes in the bibliophile journals, so that dealers or
collectors could see I was doing it and to get in touch with me.
But you have to do it, first of all, by using the sort of standard bibliographic tools.
Then you look at the nature of libraries in the world of learning, for example, when the library was founded and how many early books they have.
And on this basis, you write a lot of letters to libraries asking if they've got it.
You slip up on things.
A few years ago, somebody said, you know, you ought to inquire in Solitern in Switzerland, because that's the kind of library that should have this.
And I said, well, I don't have a copy listed there.
I'll write them a letter.
I wrote them a letter, and they said, sorry, we don't have the book.
But six months later, the librarian wrote and said, guess what?
We've found the book in the uncatalogued portion of our library.
Isn't that amazing?
I was so pleased that he remembered.
And then it turned out that it had a sufficiently interesting note in it at the beginning that we spent some effort trying to decipher the handwriting and transcribe it for the census.
And so are you planning to publish this census?
I'll show you some pages in just a moment.
All right.
But the chasing around to find the books has been quite tricky.
There's the Adams catalog of sixteenth-century books in Cambridge University libraries, but I had to be there for a number of months before I discovered that Trinity College had a copy that wasn't on the Adams list.
I'll talk about that copy in the Groyer Club lecture, probably.
Are you confident that you found most of the
Well, not all of them.
I wonder how many are out there that I haven't found.
I would like to think that it's fewer than 20 copies of the first edition, but I just don't know.
I recently, somebody had told me some time ago that he thought there was a copy in Manila, and I thought, well, yeah, it's likely the Jesuits would have taken it in, so I wrote to the Jesuit University, and they said, nothing doing.
And then, just a couple years ago,
And the information got more specific.
It was at a Dominican university.
So you did find it.
And I have, even a former student has gone in and taken a photograph of it, so it's physically there.
And how about locating private owners?
That must be a lot trickier.
Private owners is a lot trickier, and for this, I am practically dependent upon dealers, to tell me, who
they know of who's a private collector who would be apt to have it.
There tends to be a little bit of secrecy.
If a person is an active client of a dealer, a dealer is very hesitant to mention this because they don't want other dealers poaching.
But the irony of this, again, is that it always seems that the other dealers know who this person is, and they're always glad to tell me.
So there isn't too much
keeping of secrets in this business.
Now, the garden copy, which you maintain, is really probably the most important in private hands.
Where did that go, just out of curiosity?
Where did that go from the garden?
That has gone to Vicenza in Italy, and I am on my way over to have another look at it.
So it really only changed hands once since leaving the garden?
That's right.
And this is a private collection?
Yeah, quite a fabulous private collection.
He has, in fact, made a catalog of his collection.
It's sitting here on the shelf.
Is this somebody I might like to interview when I go to Italy, do you think?
You might very well want to.
Could I have a copy?
Would you imagine by having a copy of this?
I could give you a copy of that, or I could...
give you a copy of the front page of his catalog.
That would be even better, which is here.
Well, as you can see, it's just a wonderful Xerox edition.
Oh, yeah.
Isn't that nice?
He did it rather beautifully.
His name is
If I could have a copy of that.
I think this or the letter will enable me to get in touch with them, too.
I think I better give you the letter.
If you don't mind, and you can count on my discretion.
Yeah, well, I mean, it's better for you to wait, in a way, until after I've been over there to see him, so I get a better sense of how...
I really want to get some European collectors in this next book.
Otto Schaeffer.
Is he selling this collection?
He is, but it doesn't matter.
I'd still like it.
Another one is Henri Scheler.
Have you met him?
No.
I'm really going to try and get some of the really notable references.
I am going to Italy to see Umberto Eco.
Okay.
Well, when are you going to Italy?
I haven't planned it yet, but it'll be several months.
We'll wait until I'm back, and then I can tell you a little bit better.
Just so I can put him on my itinerary, projected itinerary.
That'd be great.
Right.
You see, in Europe, because of tax reasons and so on, some people try to be a little bit more secretive about what they're doing.
There's somebody you might want to check in Japan, should you ever get that far.
I hope.
His name, well, is Reverend Kumoy or something like that.
Is he the fellow that got the Lincoln stuff and the Shakespeare folios?
I don't know.
Did he form a university?
No.
He has a, he's putting them at a Buddhist monastery.
Reverend, what's his name once more?
I think it's K-U-M-O-I or something like that.
Uh-huh.
He has a Copernicus.
And I just asked about a, asked Jonathan Hill about, uh,
the catalog of Arago, of his library.
He's a Frenchman from last century.
I asked him if he still had it.
Was Copernicus listed in it?
He says it's, you know, in Kyoto, with Reverend Kumoy, I'll fax him.
So, he's busy buying.
Fascinating.
So, this is a book you've seen several times before, and yet you're going to see it again.
Oh, I'm going to see it because of the entire collection.
I'm not basically going to see the Copernicus book.
And this, of course, is a bibliophile in you.
Well, I've been chasing another book as well, which is the Appianus Astronomicum Caesareum, and he's got a copy of that, which I haven't seen.
Now, tell me a bit about that.
I've seen a hundred, over a hundred copies of that one.
Well, you see that picture on the wall?
That's not a picture.
That's an actual page.
of a book that has got layered parts on it.
There are about ten layers of paper there because it's a moving device, and this was the great tour de force of printing in the 16th century.
And who is the author of this?
His name is Apianus.
And we spell that?
A-P-I-A-N-U-S.
Well, 25 years ago,
Addition Leipzig in then East Germany put out a fantastic facsimile of this book.
You can see it's large, a full cap of lining.
Is that a facsimile?
That's the real thing.
Son of a gun.
The book is full of those kinds of things.
What happened was I was helping a dealer who had two defective copies that he was merging to try to get one good one.
And he had doubles on this particular page.
So a book was not really... And so he asked, you know, I said, you know, I'd really like your duplicate of this one, because he had only enough pages, really, to make one, almost to make one good book.
So I have one of the very few single pages in captivity of that book.
Were there, and when was this book published?
1540.
Oh, wow.
And all of that coloring was done in the shop in Ingolstadt, in his private press.
Most books at that time were, of course, hand-colored by the owner.
This was one of those rare editions where if you bought this book, you got a colored one.
Is the Copernicus illustrated at all?
Were there any illustrations in there?
Oh, lots of technical diagrams.
We would touch probably every summer.
Yeah.
This is one that has an interesting history.
It's been cut up by somebody who is busy making good books out of bad ones.
So it's, in fact, not even quite in order here.
Here's the famous page with the heliocentric diagram on it.
Wow.
Isn't that, but it hasn't really fucked that badly either, has it?
No, it's a, uh, it's an incomplete copy.
As I say, I own, uh, 1.9 copies of this book.
I have a complete one, but I have, uh,
I don't have a first edition, which is now about $150,000.
I saw Jack Pincus's copy out in L.A.
a couple years ago.
Okay.
Yeah, the nice one.
And, of course, Haskell Norman considered that's a great feeling of his collection, that he was unable to get a Copernicus.
Well, as you know, there's one listed in his catalog.
Well, that was the one that was stolen.
Yeah, that stolen copy was here in my office for about six weeks.
I was part of that story of finding out what was going on.
I don't know how much you want to impress me about the Copernican census and when you want to actually start looking at some books.
Okay.
How about just, we've got about a half an hour before you have to go back again.
I do want to actually impress you a little bit more.
So you started a new census on this book, and you hope to find out similar things from this book?
No, I only call the other one a survey rather than a census, because I haven't copied down provenances and all the rest.
But what happened was when Addition Leipzig made this facsimile, it was a tour de force of color printing, including the wrinkles, the stains, everything, excepting then they botched it up when it came time to assemble the moving parts.
So this was just
totally bungled, and I got interested in this facsimile, and then from the facsimile, got interested in seeing what their chances were of getting a bungled copy to reproduce.
And it became clear pretty rapidly that all of the copies that left Appianus's workshop were just impeccably assembled, magnificently so, and that the only copies that were messed up
were ones that had come apart because of dampness, and then pages got shuffled and so on.
I got into the Basel University Library on a Saturday afternoon, when there were no librarians around, and found their copy was all messed up.
So, I carefully reconstructed it for them, with a little trepidation, because you can never be sure
how librarians are going to feel about this kind of thing.
But in that particular case, they seemed to be very grateful that I had done it.
The British Museum copy, they were, was restored at the beginning of this century, dreadfully mixed up.
They were not about to let me move the pieces, but they took me down to the conservation
And I didn't touch them, but I pointed to them piece after piece, telling the conservators where they had to put them.
And so I essentially reconstructed the British Library copy without actually touching it.
Wow.
Would you say this became an obsession of yours, or would you say that you saw this as part of your professional mandate, or was this a hobby, or is this something you did to move yourself?
You almost have to say it's a professional hobby if there's anything like that.
So I have gone to considerable effort to see every possible copy that I can when I find out where one is, but it's not such an obsession that after an auction I knock myself out to find out where it has gone and so on.
So I know a number of copies that have passed through the auction market where I haven't a clue where they've gone.
Of course, with the Copernicus, I've worked very hard on this.
I had an interesting story one day.
Most book dealers are pretty forthcoming about where copies are, but Hans Krauss was typically a very secretive man.
So, finally, he agreed to tell me something about the copies he handled.
So, I went down to New York, and he produced the card file of all of the
Copernicus copies he had handled, but without any locations on them.
So, I went through his entire stack of cards, and I told him where each one was.
Then, when we were through, I said, where's the Prince of Lichtenstein copy?
You've sold that one, too, and it isn't here.
What did you say to him?
Well, he was pretty much faked out.
I think I melted him, because after that— Melted was the word?
Melted, yes.
uh, obviously had a grudging admiration to what I had achieved.
That's a great story.
So, did he know where, did he have an answer?
They hadn't kept a record?
He didn't know.
Wow.
It was a second edition.
Well, have you found it since then?
Most of the Prince of Liechtenstein materials have book plates in them.
I've not found one with a book plate.
So, that one's, you don't know?
I suspect I may have seen it without knowing that it was.
It could have been rebound or anything.
Yeah, but you pretty much also determined provenance as many of the books as you could.
That's right, and I don't have a Prince of Liechtenstein provenance on any copy.
Let me tell you something that's happened more recently.
That's a great little story.
I had heard a rumor that Columbia University Library had sold one of their second editions as a duplicate.
I heard some, you know, vague rumor that it had gone to Japan.
the two leading Japanese dealers denied any knowledge of it.
And so, I wrote to Columbia, and they, after some months, wrote back and said, oh, it had appeared in the Swan book auction sale at such and such a day.
Well, I knew right away that I knew where that copy had gone.
Well, why hadn't I recognized it?
And you know what?
In that process,
That book had been rebound, and all the earlier provenances destroyed, which as soon as I knew that piece of information, I was delighted to discover that the two times I had measured the book came out exactly the same to the nearest millimeter.
So, that was a check on your own procedure, wasn't it?
That's right.
And the rest of the things, like the red speckled edges, was not changed in the rebinding, so it was
It was clear that, yes, indeed, this was the same one.
That is, as far as I know, the nearest I've come to having a ghost in the same sense.
Can you think of any other books that might warrant this kind of determined investigation, not necessarily books in your professional line of perspective?
I suspect that it works better for technical books, and I think Kepler's Astronomia Nova would be another good candidate for this kind of work.
Otherwise, it's a little hard to say.
I don't think literary books are apt to draw the same kind of marginalia.
And Ulysses, for instance, to cite one example, which certainly had great consequences, as publication did.
I'm sure that nobody wrote into the margins of those books, because they recognized the value of it immediately when it came out.
That would be my guess.
That's my assumption.
Somebody is trying to do a census about Ulysses, I think.
Yeah, it'd be interesting perhaps to locate them, but I don't think looking in for marginalia is necessarily going to help.
And so, to go back to the original premise, Kessler's mandate, was it, that this is a book that nobody read?
That's totally, in your view, you've disproven that.
It seems to me that it was recognized as very important early on, and
If you stop to think about it, it's got to be wrong.
There was a second edition and a third edition.
So demand was there.
If it's an all-time worst seller, you do not have a second edition and a third edition.
So why would Tesla make such a bold statement like that?
Probably he couldn't penetrate it.
Who knows?
That's right.
Well, on this particular general area, he has preserved a certain amount of mythology.
Okay, I know you're kind of scheduled.
No, I'm still okay, but I must show you some pages of the census.
Let me bring some.
Okay.
Here you can see the camera ready copy on its under way.
This shows the physical state of the book, then the provenances, if there are any, and then
any comments about what's going on in annotations in the book.
Who will publish this?
Harvard?
It's, at the moment, we're expecting it to be published by Brill in Holland and Leiden.
Okay, now you're looking at the, at a section of USA.
So, there you, there it begins with... How did Arizona get one?
That's interesting.
They had some collectors living out there, the Barkas's.
I think they're still alive.
So you never know, do you?
You even have the prices there.
Oh, I have a lot of prices in.
Wow.
Where possible.
Going way, way back.
Here's the bankrupt's copy.
Here's the pinkest copy.
Look at all the information you have on that.
Yes, that's because there's a lot of material in it.
Now, for instance, let me just read aloud.
On the last flyleaf is a Greek inscription with a Latin paraphrase, apparently not from a classical source, followed by six Latin lines as follows.
And there's a long Latin inscription.
Heavily glossed to the very end, possibly by Bishop I, the notes derive from a close and studious reading of the text, although in general not particularly critical, they rise above the more usual brief index notes.
Longer notes are found on FF.
The star catalog contains numerous corrections, both to the positions and to the terminology.
So you've actually subjected every volume to this kind of scrutiny, is that correct?
Yes, if they've got notes in them.
So Jack Pincus is a pretty interesting book, isn't it?
It has a star on it.
A star, ah.
This is a Michelin-type system.
It goes up to three sides.
I see.
Dark Spanish goatskin double-blind scored rectangles around the sides in fluorons at the corners, and in the center of both sides, a large cartouche with the motto, R-E-L-I-C-T-U-R-O, next word, S-A-T-I-S, claps missing.
And this is from Irwin J. Pincus, which I also handled this book, I'm pleased to say.
Okay, so you get quite a bit about that.
But then you get this one, and it's only a couple of trivia notes.
No stars on this one.
No.
Then the next one will be another one in Los Altos by another one of the Silicon Valley people, a first edition.
That one I haven't inserted in there yet.
I see.
So none of these have stars.
So actually you go up to three stars.
A three-star copy obviously would be the former garden copy, the one you're going to go see again in Italy.
That would have to be three.
That's one.
Yes, there are about roughly ten three-star copies.
And to qualify as a three-star copy, you really have to have something?
You have to have interesting and in general identified
notes from a major figure.
And a two-star would be?
A two-star will have a fair number of technical comments in, and probably from a known person.
And then the one-star?
One-star means that there's something about at least one annotation in that's very interesting, whether it's been censored or something like that.
If there's no stars, it means basically it's just sort of a humdrum copy that has only trivial notes.
And you're documenting its existence of basically what you're doing.
That's right.
So you're going to have, with this, you'll have a text, an area of text to... There will be a discussion at the beginning that I suppose I had better indicate on what basis I've awarded the stars.
It hadn't occurred to me, but that's a good idea.
You mean for this?
Yeah.
Yeah, I think you should.
Now, there will be a general essay at the beginning that tells what kind of things have been found here.
Oh, sure, absolutely.
Now, here's a three-star copy.
Wow, this is Yale's copy.
Yeah, this is the only three-star copy in America.
And look at all the material.
Now, why don't you explain for me why this was a three-star copy instead of my reading, just because of all these
annotations and things here.
Because it was a copy that has been annotated both by Johannes Homelius and Johannes Pretorius, two important figures.
The Homelius is not Homelius' writing, but they're copying his annotations into the book.
And that's H-O-M-E-L-I-U-S, 1518-1562, Johannes, J-O-H-A-N-N-E-S.
Yeah, and then Johannes Praetorius.
P-R-A-E-T-O-R-I-U-S.
And so Praetorius had it after.
That's right.
So it passed from his hands to his hands.
So actually, look at the... This is... Oh, this is... Would I be able to get a Xerox of this page?
Because this really shows the owners through the generations, doesn't it?
Very interesting.
The people of this particular copy influenced.
I can probably give you a Xerox of a different copy, which will have an even richer series of provenance.
This is an example that I could draw from in the text here.
You can see now the write-up of this copy goes for five pages.
So you were excited when you... Oh, I was very excited when I realized that this was the long-lost copy that had been mentioned in the literature.
This is the Yale copy.
Yeah, but without identifying where it was, because we had this description of the copy from 1625.
Well, did Yale know what they had?
Of course not.
How would they?
So, what they knew was they had a Copernicus.
That's right.
And it took Owen Gingrich to come in and say, do you have any idea what you have here?
Something like that.
That's right.
I love that.
That's wonderful.
I'd love to have a copy of that.
Well, okay, we'll make a copy of it.
If you don't mind.
No problem.
And anything I do, I'm going to run by you, okay?
We're still several years away.
But we'll go over some of this stuff.
I think it only protects me to have it right.
Not protects, but I think when we're dealing with... It makes a lot of sense.
When we're dealing with very specific stuff like this, it behooves me to run it by you.
So...
Well, anyway, I don't think it helps to go through much more because you get the flavor of it.
And that has no stars at all, the OOC copy.
This one I should probably give a star to.
A lot of people would suppose that Day 2's copy would be worth something, but there are no annotations in it.
That's D-E capital T-H-O-M-U, and Day 2 is one of the famous collectors who
has very wonderful bookbinding.
That's Jacques Auguste II, 1533-1717, French historian and fastidious book collector.
This library passed through several owners before being auctioned in 1789.
This is wonderful.
This is really wonderful.
You can't tell me you're not having fun with this.
Now, you've just indicated you're going to give it a star?
No, I just noticed that it's inconsistent here in the capitalization.
I see.
And that's the one that was purloined, right?
Is that the Crearine copy?
No.
No, that's the University of Chicago copy.
This is the purloined copy.
And you can see.
There are quite a few copies in Chicago, aren't there?
Stone.
Book plates removed.
So it reports, um,
and that was consigned to Howell and illustrated in catalog 53, item 41, 1981, $60,000, sold to Dr. Haskell Norman, San Francisco collector, but returned when the Chicago theft was discovered.
Now, this number, that's designation, that's 1566, 1565.
1566 means it's a second edition, and 1543 means it's a first edition.
Now, the reason for mixing both the first and second editions
in the same run, as that so often when you have a first edition and a second edition in the same library, a lot of the book stamps and so on are exactly the same, and there's no reason to describe them the second time in such detail.
So that usually, often, the copies are related.
This is particularly true when you have old
No annotations you're pointing at?
No.
Oh, since 1977, this copy has been missing.
Yep.
Stolen, you assume?
Presumably.
And this one was at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign.
Mm-hmm.
Great.
They had it on some sort of relatively informal exhibition, not in a case.
And when the day was over, somehow, by and by, they realized they didn't have as many books as they had started out with.
It's sad, isn't it?
It's really... Whoever stole it has it for his own personal use because it hasn't appeared in the market.
That's fascinating.
It really is.
Very rich.
To get back on, yeah, that would be wonderful.
What I think, Doctor, is... Let me transcribe this.
I'll be in touch and we'll get together again.
That sounds good to me.
The reason I have a safe is that I was being eaten up by insurance costs, and I finally discovered that if I would buy a safe and not insure them,
Don't put that in your mouth.
I'm not.
It would save me a lot of money, and I could buy more books.
The safe pays for itself in a few months.
You know, because this is a rifle safe, but they also sell it with shells.
Let me pick out a...
This is now what we're looking at are items from your personal collection.
That's right.
This is a John of Glogal commentary on the sphere of Sacrobasto.
John of Glogal was probably one of Copernicus's teachers at Krakow.
So it has a very nice wood block there, a very charming wood block here of the earth and the various spheres of water, air, and fire, and planets, and their heaven all around.
When I saw this book, I was charmed by those.
I specialize in Sacrovasca, which is what he's coming on.
But when I hit this page, I knew I had to have this book.
Now, you hold that.
Okay.
These are hand drawings here, right?
Mm-hmm.
Sacrovasca.
Now, that is, let's see, that's, if you translate it, it turns out to be John of Hollywood.
Okay.
Now, here's another Sacre Vasco.
This is in a 1499 edition.
Wow.
So this is an inkunable, and it's rather pretty because it has all these hand-colored illustrations from way back then.
It's hard to believe that that's quite when we did it over, isn't it?
Just about.
Yeah.
It goes over in a few years.
That's magnificent.
Look at all the annotations.
And notice, this is the
Sacrobasto text, and this is the commentary.
It's set up like a medieval manuscript.
Just hang on.
What we're looking at is that this individual, the book I'm holding, copied these illustrations directly out of this printed text here and did a very good job of it, actually.
The only thing he lost was the flag.
But otherwise, look, the little details of the ship, everything is all there.
Now, did you recognize this immediately?
I recognized it immediately.
You did, because you knew this text so well.
Yeah.
And the title of this text once again?
They're both sakravaskas.
But the owner of this tried to put in, I wonder why he chose those two illustrations?
Well, now turn over to the previous page.
Wow.
That's amazing.
And they're very good, aren't they?
They're very capably done.
Now, the fact is, this one is rotating compared to here.
So I'm sure these guys have these same wood blocks all down in Venice.
They were putting them in edition after edition.
So actually, then, he hasn't copied it from this edition, but probably from another edition that has that wood block 90 degrees around.
And especially where he's so good, you can see it.
I mean, you can see that.
Yeah, exactly.
Old bits there.
Wonderful.
Well, look, he did this in many places, didn't he?
Mm-hmm.
So anyway, that was why I had to have that.
And do we know who the owner was of this?
No, we don't.
This is G-O-O-G-O-D-I-E-N-S Sacro.
That's for Sacro Vasco.
Okay, and this is Sacro Vasco.
Just so when I come to spell this and transcribe it, I'm not going to go crazy.
Oh, that's wonderful.
In any event, we don't know who annotated it, but I agreed that if it was Copernicus's hand, I would get back in touch with the dealer.
Well, as you point out, there were very few things extant in Copernicus's hand.
That's right.
And what's very interesting is that he is such a mystery, almost like Shakespeare in that regard.
There's so little .
You can do better than with Shakespeare in some ways.
because there are so many books still extant from his library, all in Uppsala, where they were taken in the Thirty Years' War.
And so it's kind of fun to go up there.
So there is a window into his soul, to a degree, isn't there, with his books?
I felt, after looking at those books, that this was great.
It was not just a cardboard figure, but a real flesh-and-blood guy who owned the books.
And so you went to see his library?
I did.
And that is where it was in Uppsala in Sweden, and the first time I did it,
They didn't have these books separated out, so I had to spend a whole morning writing call slips, just have them fetched from all the different divisions where they were classified.
Have they put them back together again, I hope?
Now they have, yes.
It's a lot easier to see the whole works.
But it was wonderful to get them all fetched and put them in a line there in the sort of broken sunlight coming in through the windows and get a
Have you thought of writing a biographical essay of Copernicus?
I'm going to write a biography of Copernicus.
I am on the schedule for that.
I anticipated that because it seems like you're on track to do that.
Now, I said that on that Reinhold copy, we could see how he was just looking at this sun-centered system as a hypothetical mathematical device.
And out of the teaching tradition in
In Wittenberg, there came some studies of these astronomical hypotheses.
Now, I've got to find another book, which is very key for this, and let me see how easily I can do it.
Looks like an original pigskin writing, doesn't it, huh?
No, I've got a lot of them like that.
Here we go.
What I discovered was that Reinhold's notes
which he had started making on that subject, were then worked up by his student, Poytzer, but they were published first in this pirated edition out of Strasbourg in 15... You have to go always to the back of one of these early books to find out.
I don't even find it there.
I guess in that case you have to look when the dedication is dated.
I think it's...
1568.
Well, this book is a real rarity.
What's the title of this?
I wouldn't even try it.
This one, I thought, well, if I'm going to bid several times over the estimated bid, I will be sure to get it.
But unfortunately, it took only one other reader of my article about the importance of this
I didn't think anybody in the book business would have read that article, but it turned out that a former History of Science student who had gone into the rare book trade bid it away from me, and I had to wait several years until he decided that he needed to remodel his house, and he would dispense with some of the books.
Were you the underbidder?
Of course.
Where was this sale?
In Germany, I think.
Did you go specifically to get there?
Oh, I didn't go to the auction.
You had an agent.
I got an agent.
Yeah, you get an agent.
If you're going to be bidding, say, three or four times the estimated bid, you don't want to tip off the auctioneer.
Sure.
You can never be sure, but in general, I find that German auctions are honest.
I've found I have some suspicions about some other options.
If you put in a high bid and it comes in exactly on your high bid,
you really wonder if there was an under there.
In any event, this book is so rare that it hasn't, this is, as far as we know, the only copy that's passed through the market in the 20th century.
So I was really pleased to get it.
Well, this guy, Conrad Dasipodius, who put out this pirate edition that says in the preface, he doesn't know whose it is, but it's interesting, and so he's publishing it.
and he dedicates it to William the long grave of Hesse.
Well, hardly has he done that when there is an agonized cry from Wittenberg.
Caspar Poitzer saying, but he knew full well whose it was, and he knew it wasn't his.
And so Caspar Poitzer publishes it.
Now, this is in a box because it's very curious.
It is bound in velvet.
and you very rarely see a book bound in velvet.
It doesn't last too long, and you can see it's very scruffy.
So, fortunately, it's scruffy, because otherwise some dealer would have bought the thing as an object without worrying about what was in it.
This time through, I got my friend who had bought the other one to agree not to bid against me.
Have you read this?
I mean, is this something you've actually penetrated?
Well, I've looked at it enough to have an idea about it.
So it's very curious.
It's another astronomical book, of course.
It's another version, but now this is what you might call the authorized edition.
And notice that it is also dedicated to William, the Landgrave of Hesse.
All right, there's a signature on the title page.
You can't tell immediately what it is, but having seen it before, I know it is Herman, Landgrave of Hesse.
the grandson of the dedicatee.
Well, it turns out that a velvet binding is the most expensive binding you can make in the 16th century, unless you're encrusting the jewels or something.
So, it was reserved only for nobility and so on.
So, probably, this is the dedication copy of the book, which was in the family.
Sure.
And I've had it passed down through several generations.
And the grandson, who also got interested in astronomy, put his name in it.
So what would the English title of this book be?
Astronomical Hypotheses, or The Theory of the Pilots.
So it is reflecting this whole idea that what Copernicus is doing is mathematical hypotheses, not the physical reality of the world.
So these two books are very much part and parcel.